
Psychedelics are fascinating, mind-altering compounds showing promise as novel treatment modalities targeting a range of mental afflictions. While the neurobiology and psychopharmacology of psychedelics have been studied extensively, research on their phenomenology is comparatively held back by dated technologies like psychometric inventories based on visual analogue scale ratings. 
This study explores the feasibility of quantifying the phenomenological dispositions of psychedelic compounds by means of semantic vector embeddings. This is operationalized with a computational approach to cognitive linguistics, leveraging a state-of-the-art transformer embedding model to compute vector embeddings for a corpus of textual, unstructured first-hand narrative reports chronicling psychedelic experiences obtained from curated archives of Erowid, a psychoactive drug-safety advocacy group. 
3817 experience reports across five psychedelic compounds are embedded in a latent semantic space along with textual characterizations of three established dimensions of psychedelic phenomenology before quantifying the alignment of each experience report with each phenomenological axis by virtue of computing cosine similarity between the resultant embedding vectors. 
The functional relationship between the eliciting compound and the phenomenological qualities of the experience is modeled using a multivariate multilevel generalized linear model while controlling for potential confounding due to unbalanced demographics, yielding per-compound distributions of experience similitude with each phenomenological dimension. 
Findings suggest that the prospect of using semantic embeddings to quantify the comparative phenomenology of psychedelic compounds is a promising one. Limitations pertaining to the empirical source and employed methodology are discussed. 