= Discussion <discussion>

Results obtained indicated that the semantic embedding approach did seem to pick on latent semantic signals pertaining to phenomenological dimensions of psychedelic experiences. Additionally, the inter-compound relationships seemed broadly in concordance with existing literature on the topic, albeit with one notable discrepancy. 

Consistent with the findings of #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose") — see @studerus_OAV — MDMA stood out as having the lowest propensity across the board for all three of the OAV dimensions. DMT distinguished itself as occasioning the largest degree of both Oceanic Boundlessness as well as Visual Restructuralization. For Anxious Ego-Dissolution, there is significant overlap between parameter estimates for Ketamine, LSD and DMT while Psilocybin separates itself as ostensibly engendering this aspect to the greatest extent. Dissenting from #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose"), we find that Psilocybin is estimated to be associated with Oceanic Boundlessness to a greater extent than Ketamine. In #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose"), Ketamine also scored higher on Anxious Ego-Dissolution, whereas, as mentioned, we find Psilocybin winning out. In terms of Visual Restructuralization, the pattern observed in #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose") was replicated, though with less clear separation between Ketamine and Psilocybin. 

An explanation for the inversion of the relative ranking of Psilocybin and Ketamine — particularly in terms of Anxious Ego-Dissolution where the modeled relationship differs markedly from that observed by #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose") — may be found in Ketamine's complex dose-response dynamics @liCorticalDynamicsPsychedelic2019 @nicolCharacteristicPatternsEEG2020. This means the experience can differ dramatically in phenomenological expression depending on the exact dosage. At very large doses, so-called _K-hole_ phenomena, experienced as an intense detachment from reality, may arise @gallimoreRealitySwitchTechnologies2022. These are associated with experiences of melting into one's surroundings and out-of-body experiences, what may correspond to the dimension of Oceanic Boundlessness @muetzelfeldtJourneyKholePhenomenological2008, but also with near-death experiences @stirlingQuantifyingPsychologicalEffects2010, which would presumably contribute to Anxious Ego-Dissolution. If the samples for Ketamine included in #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose") pertained to higher doses than is the case for naturalistic use (represented by the Erowid sample), this may explain why the present investigation found Ketamine to be less prominent in these two dimensions. This hypothesis finds some support since it appears that _all_ samples for Ketamine in #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose") stemmed from "medium" or "high" doses, whereas dose-distributions for MDMA and Psilocybin were centered around "medium" doses #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), supplement: "Table 1"). This is just one possible explanation for what may have precipitated the discrepancy between results obtained in this study and results observed in existing literature.

Variation in age at the time of having the experience did not seem to significantly impact propensity for any of the OAV dimensions. In terms of sex differences, the model fit indicated that being male was associated with reduced expression in each of three phenomenological dimensions, more so for Anxious Ego-Dissolution than Oceanic Boundlessness and Visual Restructuralization. Sensitivity analyses indicating that these aspects had minimal scope for confounding somewhat tempered concerns of unbalanced contributor demographics driving the phenomenological differentiation. 

However, more work is needed to verify and validate these results — particularly for the inter-compound contrasts where no suitable reference was found — in a more controlled setting. Also, for MDMA, Ketamine and DMT which were markedly less well-represented in the corpus than LSD and Psilocybin (see @corpus_overview), the reliability of the analysis would certainly have benefitted from larger sample sizes. This is particularly true for Ketamine and DMT, where sex ratios were highly unbalanced. 

A literature review did reveal one study due to #cite(label("gouzoulis-mayfrankPsychologicalEffectsSKetamine2005"), form: "prose") which might have served as a reference for the contrast between DMT and Ketamine. The study even compares the respective phenomenological profiles factorially across two levels of dosage. However, the study in question dealt specifically with (S)-Ketamine (the purified S-enantiomer of Ketamine; also referred to as "Esketamine"), which is, strictly speaking, a distinct chemical compound from racemic Ketamine. This fact may give it different phenomenological properties. Because of this, comparison of the presented results pertaining to Ketamine, and those of #cite(label("gouzoulis-mayfrankPsychologicalEffectsSKetamine2005"), form: "author") relating to (S)-Ketamine, were considered fallacious and refrained from. 

There are multiple legitimate objections to both the methodology, construct operationalization and the empirical data relied upon in this investigation, each of which append caveats and demand certain reservations when considering the findings.

=== Empirical Merit

Firstly, there's the issue relating to the origins and dependability of the data retrieved from Erowid. While featuring in journals such as _Frontiers in Neuroscience_ (e.g., #cite(label("sanzExperienceElicitedHallucinogens2018"), form: "author"), #cite(label("sanzExperienceElicitedHallucinogens2018"), form: "year")) and _Journal of Psychopharmacology_ (e.g., #cite(label("garcia-romeuCessationReductionAlcohol2019"), form: "author"), #cite(label("garcia-romeuCessationReductionAlcohol2019"), form: "year")) has lent Erowid's Experience Vaults some academic legitimacy, it cannot be ignored that the veracity of these self-reports being anecdotal and non-verifiable, constraining the trustworthiness of the data and spawning some skepticism as to its credibility.  
A slight mitigation of this worry may be found in Erowid's stewardship practices of curating material on their site. As of January 2023, more than 117 000 reports had been submitted to Erowid @erowidcenterExperienceVaults, but "only" 39 000 had passed the extensive review process and been listed in the Experience Vaults @erowidcenterErowidExperienceVaults2023. This review process includes a two-reviewer triage and averages six months from submission until acceptance and publication @erowidcenterBriefOverviewErowid2005. While this does not directly address the issue of reports' veracity, it does go some way in ensuring that they are relevant and have value as data. 

Another apposite consideration relates to Erowid's contributors, what would be considered _subjects_ in the vernacular of research design. By using the Erowid corpus, we have effectively pre-selected for a segment of the general population that 1) on their own initiative, engages in administration of what is, in most parts of the world, illegal or controlled substances and 2) are inclined to chronicle and share their personal experiences publicly on the internet where it is available to anyone. The resulting demographic will arguably be quite unrepresentative of the broader population, which may severely restrict the external validity and generalizability of any patterns identified in this study. It must be noted, however, that (many) clinical trials on psychedelics also suffer from this, so this is not a qualification that is exclusive to the Erowid corpus.     

It can also not be easily ascertained whether an experience report concerns use of a psychedelic compound for self-medication of a mental or physical affliction, or simply for recreational purposes. This is consequential due to the fact that extra-pharmacological factors can mediate and pivotally shape the phenomenology of a psychedelic experience @haijenPredictingResponsesPsychedelics2018. In the culture of psychedelics, these external factors are often explained in terms of _set and setting_ @zinbergDrugSetSetting1984 @hartogsohnSetSettingPsychedelics2016, meaning the intention set for the trip and the environment in which the trip is carried out, respectively (e.g., what emotional state the individual was in; what was the intention behind the trip; whether an experienced guide was present; whether the substance was ingested in a quiet environment or in a loud party setting). Since the experiences in the Erowid corpus effectively represent a non-coordinated effort of self-experimentation, it can be reasonably be assumed that these experiences took place across a wider gamut of contexts than would be the case in clinical trials (where strict, tightly controlled, regimens would be followed) @glynosNaturalisticPsychedelicUse2023. In this way, the Erowid dataset can be thought of as a window into uncompromisingly naturalistic use of the psychedelics. This may, incidentally, turn out to be advantageous in divulging the full range of  psychedelic phenomenology by spanning a greater diversity of contexts than would be expected in highly constrained therapeutic environments. There are sound arguments for why clinical practices go to great lengths in controlling and constraining sets and settings to avoid so-called _bad trips_ which may, counterproductively, traumatize the patient and compromise the trajectory of recovery @evansExtendedDifficultiesFollowing2023. However, far from eliminating it, this just emphasizes the importance of grasping the full spectrum of phenomenological expressions these substances can engender, so we can gain a better understanding of how to employ them constructively. 

A related constraint is tied to the narrative free-form format of the reports. Because the report text bodies are monolithic — in the sense that a single text body covers the full recollection of the experience and any context provided along with it — there's no way to easily dissociate parts of reports pertaining to the content of the experience (the phenomenological description of the actual trip) from the context of a experience (the individual's personal history, e.g., what has led them to ingest this substance, what they hope to achieve from it, how they've felt during the time between the experience and writing up the report). This means only some of the text mass relates to the phenomenological experience, which will inevitably reduce the signal-to-noise ratio with of relevant phenomenological constructs. When looking for rather subtle variations in lexical choice that may not present themselves but for a minority of critical sentences, massive amounts of text are needed to reliably pick up on such a signal without being overwhelmed by extensive noise not related to the construct of interest. Considering this, the size the compiled corpus may be called into question as being of insufficient scale to reliably quantify the subtle patterns of phenomenology sought for. One worry of insufficient sample size would be that the if we were dealing with tiny effect sizes, the signal would not be separable from noise, which does not seem to be the case. Another would be spurious relations arising due to small subsets of data having large amounts of leverage. Such an effect may be mitigated simply by increasing sample size, courtesy of the law of large numbers. 

Finally, all but a few reports list, alongside the date at which the report was published to the Erowid Vaults (as in listed for public access, not the date at which it was submitted to Erowid by the contributor), the year in which the psychedelic experience took place. Approximately a third of reports were published more than a year after the experience took place, while two thirds were published more than five years after the experience ostensibly took place. Calling into mind the lead time of around six months associated with Erowid's triage @erowidcenterBriefOverviewErowid2005 may explain some of this disparity, but it certainly does not explain the significant proportion of reports listed more than five years after the experience took place. Digging into this issue by looking at how lead time has varied across the years, we find that since the early 2000s, the mean lead time has ballooned such that in 2018 it exceeded 11 years on average. It's not clear whether this is simply a case of Erowid's backlog snowballing during those years, or whether it is a case of large groups of people discovering the Erowid platform in the late 2010s and deciding to contribute by retrospectively relating experiences they have had multiple years past. 

This segues into the issue of cognitive biases accompanying retrospective accounts of experienced events. Disregarding the question of relative proportions attributable to Erowid's triage lead time and the time elapsed between an individual having the actual experience to submitting the report to Erowid, it seems likely that an appreciable share of reports were not penned immediately following the experience, let alone on the day thereof. This opens the door for a number of memory-related cognitive biases to seep in, which may distort recollection away from what would have been reported had the data been collected at the earliest opportunity. One such example may be what #cite(label("kahnemanMapsBoundedRationality2003"), form: "prose") termed _the peak/end rule_: "[e]xtended episodes are represented in memory by a typical moment — and the desirability or aversiveness of the episode is dominated by the remembered utility of that moment." As memories are consolidated overnight, details may get lost, distilling the experience to a point where only highly salient aspects remain. 

In sum, the Erowid corpus comes "with strings attached". The legal landscape surrounding psychedelics means large-scale experiments are hard to come by, and raw data generated by such experiments are unlikely to be publicly available due to the sensitive nature of their contents. Thus, seeing as comparable data generated under controlled circumstances are currently out of reach, these data represent a fallible, yet valuable, resource. 

=== Methodological Considerations

The fact that this was a wholly post-hoc observational study with no randomization or experimental control dictates caution and care when inferring from the data, particularly as it relates to causality. One of the major perils of relying on exclusively observational data is that confounding may seep in in all sorts of ways. 

Not having experimental control is particularly treacherous when dealing with a between-subjects design, as we have no way of knowing whether people engaging in one compound are just different in meaningful ways from those engaging in other compounds and whether that drives the semantic patterns differentiating the compounds in the analysis. The demography of contributors may have simply been different in such ways that (some of) the differentiation we see could be manifestations of inherent differences in psychological make-up of these demographies, independent of the actions of the respective psychoactive compound. This is in addition to the basic inconvenience that the data may not be address in the most direct manner possible the conceptual construct that we may be interested in, as is the case with Erowid's free-form format prohibiting the dissociation of context surrounding the experience and phenomenological content of the experience itself. 

In addition to the methodological concerns relating to research design, there are also questions to be asked of the tools employed, both in terms of reliability, validity and interpretability. Although modern iterations of large language models (and neural networks in general) have reached impressive levels of performances on a number of tasks in diverse domains, they have also been extensively criticized for failing sporadically in curious and unexpected ways, often on tasks that would seem, to a human, no different and no harder than cases which the models handle with ease @alemohammadSelfConsumingGenerativeModels2023 @xuHallucinationInevitableInnate2024 @wuReasoningRecitingExploring2024 @berglundReversalCurseLLMs2024. This points to one of the major disadvantages associated with neural network-based tools as it relates to epistemology: the "black box problem" of AI. This refers to the opaque nature of neural architectures which have made it notoriously difficult to intuitively explain how these models arrive at the result they spit, to understand exactly _why_ that was the result in a given instance; it appears that much of their behavior are emergent phenomena @voneschenbachTransparencyBlackBox2021 @castelvecchiCanWeOpen2016. The corollary is that when things go awry, we cannot account for the etiology and, more worryingly, it can be very difficult to tell _whether_ the model is behaving in the manner expected. This is particularly true for domains where the model outputs are voluminous and hard to validate, e.g., semantic embeddings for thousands of documents. 
In this vein, we cannot be sure whether the semantic signal we are picking up on is in fact related to the phenomenological dimension we are interested in. Rather, it is possible that computed similarities are, to some degree, driven by semantic variation entirely unrelated to phenomenology, e.g., simply valence or some other property that is not balanced in the descriptions of the OAV dimensions. 

Furthermore, it stands to reason that the distributional semantics hypothesis — i.e., that words used in the same contexts tend to carry similar meanings — applies only _on aggregate_, not at arbitrarily granular levels @lenciDistributionalSemanticsLinguistic2008. Transformer models may exhibit errant behavior particularly on short segments of text in domains that are not well-represented in the pre-training data @geffetDistributionalInclusionHypotheses2005, or they may simply struggle with the thorny issues of homonomy (words spelled identically but having different meanings) and polysemy (a single word having multiple meanings), which constitute an eternal challenge for these tools @liMultiSenseEmbeddingsImprove2015. 
Finally, there are reasons to treat with caution the concept of cosine similarity and to not naïvely equate it with semantic similarity @steckCosineSimilarityEmbeddingsReally2024. Cosine similarity is just one way to quantify the general notion of similitude in a vector space. There are no guarantees that applying this operation on semantic embeddings in such a vector space corresponds to our intuitive understanding of semantic likeness, and there are also no guarantees that there is not another mathematical operation out there which does more closely align with our anthropocentric notion of being semantically similar. It seems simply a case of cosine similarity being a well-known, computationally efficient operation with convenient properties which, as it turned out, made it well-suited as a starting point for the task of determining similarity of text embedded in a vector space @singhalModernInformationRetrieval2001. 

Another proviso is that a similarity measure like cosine similarity cannot account for variation not present in the embedding representation it is fed. It cannot transcend the information it is given, meaning that it is limited by the resolution and degree to which the embeddings constitute a meaningful representation of the latent semantic space. 
Finally, seeing as the Erowid corpus data stretches over more than two decades, it is worth considering that the meaning of words may diachronically change @hamiltonDiachronicWordEmbeddings2016, adding to the list of reservations tied to semantic embeddings. 

With these considerations in hand, the validity and reliability of using semantic embeddings in concert with cosine similarity to operationalize correspondence with scantly defined phenomenological dimensions should be treated with a certain degree of skepticism. 

=== Future Directions

There are a number of ways to build upon this venture of leveraging semantic embeddings to quantitatively investigate (psychedelic) phenomenology. 

An obvious next step would be to expand to the 11D-ASC scale proposed by #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose"). As alluded to supra, #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "author") contest Dittrich's claim that his "[...] original hypotheses on ASC have survived considerable falsification testing not only in experimental but also in field studies and that the APZ questionnaire has become a psychometrically well-validated instrument for the assessment of ‘aetiology-independent' features of ASC in a 'aetiology-independent' three-dimensional space [...]." They cite "serious methodological limitations, [of] which only few have been
recognized in the existing literature" @studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010.
They ultimately assert that "OBN, DED#footnote[#cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "author") refer to Anxious Ego-Dissolution (AED) as Dread of Ego-Dissolution (DED) and use VRS instead of VIR to abbreviate Visual Restructuralization.], and VRS scales are multidimensional constructs that can be split into many reliable and valid subscales. Although the use of the OBN, DED, and VRS scales — due to their relatively strong general factor saturations — might be justified for predicting complex criteria, we believe that our newly constructed subscales should be preferred for most applications, because they are only slightly less reliable but much more homogeneous" @studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010. 
The immediate obstacle to this path lies in the scarcity of textual definition #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "author") provide. A full eight of their 11 dimensions are defined and delineated by just three short sentences #cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), form: "prose", supplement: "Figure 1"). Notwithstanding the potency of today's transformer models, a textual foundation that scant is likely to be insufficient for reliable results. This remains an unknown as such an endeavor was not exhaustively pursued in the course of the present investigation. Over time, these challenges may be mitigated from two sides: transformer models continuing to develop and becoming increasingly sensitive to subtler semantic patterns could go some way, but it will arguably also require the 11D-ASC being elaborated to have more comprehensive textual bases. 

Going in another direction, the semantic embedding approach could be leveraged in a more exploratory data-mining capacity, e.g., to derive from latent semantic patterns new phenomenological dimensions that have not yet found their way into the literature. A questionnaire, no matter how sophisticated and carefully designed, cannot pick up on aspects not addressed by the questions or statements it puts forth. Because of this, there may exist important and useful phenomenological dimensions not yet identified or described, simply for a lack of imagination or necessary conceptual constructs to envisage such dimensions on the part of those designing such questionnaires. Machine learning algorithms, e.g., topic-modelling approaches, may be a way toward identifying such latent constructs with unsupervised learning to yield novel axes of phenomenology which can add to our understanding of how psychedelic compounds relate to each other phenomenologically. 

A further opportunity for generalizing the approach would be expanding into languages other than English. Ideally, it would be generalized to the point of being panlingual, such that contributors could recount their experiences in their mother tongue. Being constrained by having to translate one's thoughts into a non-native language is a lossy process that can easily diminish, if not eliminate, the subtle lexical variations conveying phenomenological experience. #cite(label("dittrichStandardizedPsychometricAssessment1998"), form: "author")'s original formulation of the OAV scale was in German, promptly translated into English and subsequently to an array of other languages in order to make it an internationally applicable tool @studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010.
At first glance, making the OAV panlingual would require the scale's questionnaire to be carefully translated into any and all languages while preserving the linguistic coupling with latent phenomenological constructs. However, transformer models may here present another possibility, owing to the emergence of multilingual (also referred to as language-agnostic) models that can compute semantic embeddings in the same latent space for text sources written in a variety of languages @artetxeMassivelyMultilingualSentence2019 @duquenneMultimodalMultilingualEmbeddings2021. This would, theoretically, allow for computing semantic embeddings for experience reports written by people in their respective languages into a common semantic space, paving the way for a broader understanding of the psychedelic phenomenology in more global, non-WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich and Democratic) demographics.   

=== Concluding Remarks

The findings presented suggest that semantic embeddings hold promise as a tool for quantifying the phenomenology of psychedelic experiences. However, the employed methodology is exposed to serious pitfalls which may limit its validity. This means results should not be considered in isolation or without reservations. These concerns notwithstanding, reported results may yet contribute to the accruing knowledge base on psychedelics and their experiential aspects, adding to the toolbox of researchers in this and related fields. 

Studying mind-altering substances and their phenomenology is an inherently challenging endeavor. And it is complicated even further by the unfortunate reality that pertinent data is scant, particularly the high-quality sort with experimental control baked in. This means empirical data of the observational kind, with the limited inference this affords us, may be the best we can do; at least for now. In time, access to large-scale experience report corpora generated with experimental control may pave the way for novel tools — such as the one proposed in this study — to help us reach a more comprehensive understanding of psychedelics and their phenomenological intricacies. #sym.qed

/*
#cite(label("studerusPsychometricEvaluationAltered2010"), supplement: "the paper's authors subscribe to the abbreviations DED (dread of ego-dissolution) instead of AED and VRS instead of VIR"). 

stunted
evokes 
Considering the findings
contingent

While these phenomenological themes can be subtle, particularly when considering that This hints at why something like basic sentiment analysis is unsuited for teasing apart subtle phenomenological properties of psychedelic experiences which call for more proprietary constructs. 

extensive variety: individualised, highly context-dependent effects 

while the law of large numbers will asymptotically weed out natural fluctuation, it will not adress systematic bias.  

acute effects possibly necessary for neuroplastic effects:
- overt, highly salient subjective effects
- designer drugs conferring neuroplasticity without the trip would not favour the present approach

some affective dimensions are foregrounded while others are smothered
Imperfect recollection and other cognitive biases exacerbated (e.g., affective)

The presented findings give rise to a number of questions
Additionally, there are a number of considerations/matters of concern which much be addressed with regard to the present study. 

individualised, highly context-dependent effects 

@vandermeerTherapeuticEffectPsilocybin2023 @smithMDMAAssistedPsychotherapyTreatment2022

@wattsPatientsAccountsIncreased2017 -> Patients’ Accounts of Increased “Connectedness” and “Acceptance” After Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression

@griffithsPsilocybinCanOccasion2006 -> Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance

this is more so a
major work on validation and cross-checking would be required to approach some
even with 4096-dimensional resolution 
"only 4096 dimensions"
picking up on something else 
there is always the risk
inherent limitation of black box property

remiss

expanding into new areas, diversify, deriving new with topic modelling

Earth and Fire’s idea was to close the rift: to maintain a comprehensive data set that could serve as a primary reference for everyone from the village stoner to the national drug czar

accumulative
accretive

and should be treated with epoché

as is alluded to in the upcoming section

important to note that this neural-state likelihood landscape is only one framework for understanding the neuropharmacological effects of psychedelics 

acting mechanism: distinguish between the psychological (acute effects) and the neurologcial level (neuroplasticity)

With the emergence of large language models which bring performance across a variety of tasks and domains requiring — or at least benefitting from — an understanding of semantic world-models, 

as alluded to in the introduction section of this article, 
great strides
enticing
*/